[THEME MUSIC]
>> Namaste.
My name is Kishan Shah
and welcome to "Thrive--
Self-healing with Ayurveda."
I'm a longtime practitioner of
Ayurvedic medicine and teacher
of yoga and meditation.
In this video, I'm going to
share with you some morning
ritual practices.
They are a part of an Ayurvedic
self-care daily routine called
Dinacharya.
These practices, along with
the self-massage and mouth care
videos will create a complete
morning program for you
in your daily regimen towards
radiant health and wellness.
Unfortunately, many of
us use our cell phone
as our alarm clock.
So naturally many people's
response, the first step
in the morning, is to check
for emails, text messages,
and social media
likes or comments.
And then immediately
what can happen then
is we become fragmented
into the demands of others
and fall back into that modern
dilemma of self-gratification
and validation from
external sources.
Beginning your morning
routines with self-care
is a truly beautiful way
to honor your body, mind,
and spirit.
You're going to love
implementing these
into your lifestyle.
So start by setting your alarm
clock in the morning to wake
before the rising of the sun.
And when you wake up, roll
onto your back and smile.
And then place your right
hand over your heart
and then your left hand on top.
Breathe into your heart slowly
and out through your nose.
Breathe into your nose
and guide that breath down
into your heart space.
And then exhale out your mouth.
Notice the warmth in your
internal landscape that washes
over you when you do this.
Next, I invite you to
create a morning incantation
or personal prayer that you
can recite every morning.
It will probably change as
you practice it more and more,
so don't worry about getting
it perfect from the start.
Begin with gratitude for
your life, for your family,
and for your health.
Self acknowledgment.
Your beautiful body and all
of your talents and strengths.
Gratitude for the awareness of
simply bringing these practices
into your life and
the powerful impact
they're going to have on you.
Acknowledge the love that
you have in your heart
and begin sending
it out consciously
to the loved ones in your life.
Feel them receiving
these blessings.
Bring your attention
to the beautiful work
that you're going to
set out and do today.
See the things that
you're going to create,
the discussions and meetings
you're going to have.
Envision them moving forwards
in the best possible outcome.
Give thanks to God
or whatever you
believe in for the gift of life
and the magic that is going
to happen in the day to come.
Smile again and let
all of that radiate
through your entire body.
Take a few long, deep
breaths in through your nose.
Exhale softly out the mouth.
And now for a little bed yoga.
These postures will
help relieve any tension
that you have in your back from
sleeping through the night.
In Sanskrit, we call this
Pawanmuktasana Cycle.
It will also tell the large
intestine that you're awake,
and shortly, it'll be
time for a bowel movement.
So let's begin.
Lying on your back in bed,
start by drawing your right knee
into your chest and
holding it there,
extending your left leg
out in front of you.
This is called power
Pawanmuktasana.
And then take your time and
begin slowing your breath down.
Be mindful to soften your belly,
and as you breathe into it,
allow it to expand out.
Taking a few breaths here, feel
yourself dropping beautifully
into your body and becoming
more and more relaxed with each
and every passing exhalation.
On the next exhale, slowly
take that right knee
all the way over to
your left hand side.
Coming into a twist, extend the
right arm out and just pause,
relax into your body.
Close your eyes.
Feel that dream state
you just came out of.
Take a few breaths there.
Take a big breath in
through your nose.
Exhale out the mouth.
And then slowly come
onto your backs again.
Draw both knees into
the chest and then we'll
do the other side.
So keeping the left knee in,
extend the right leg out,
pause there in Pawanmuktasana.
Take a couple of breaths.
Soften and relax.
One more breath in.
And then exhale.
Come on over into the twist.
Opposite side.
Take your left knee all the way
over to the right hand side.
Extend the left arm out.
And then guide your breath
down into those spaces
that may feel tight or tension.
Breathe into those spaces.
Let them feel like
they're expanding
and then release that
tension as you exhale.
We'll take one more
breath like that.
Breath in through the nose.
Exhale softly out of the mouth.
Beautiful.
Come back to your back.
Draw both knees into the chest.
Pause there.
Maybe bringing a smile
back to your face.
Right?
Maybe even a laugh
will come out now.
So once you feel good
and present in your body,
it's now time to sit
up in bed and gaze
into those incredible
hands of yours.
These tools that you were
given to take hold of your day
in beautiful ways
and create with.
Then bring your hands together
in prayer close to your heart
and bow your head in reverence
to simply being alive
and the opportunity to
step into a new day.
The right and left
hand sides of your body
are associated with
different energies.
So check in with the kind
of day that you're expecting
to have in front of you.
And if you're
feeling like you're
going to have more
of a creative day,
then step out of bed with your
left foot hitting the ground
first.
If you feel like you need
for more intellectual prowess
and masculine might, step out
of bed leading with your right
foot first.
And then we're going to drop
into Malasana Yogic Squat.
So bring your elbows to
the insides of the knees.
Let your tailbone drop low.
And then sit up nice and tall.
Then first, we're
going to connect
to the energy of the Earth
by placing hands down
onto the ground.
Bow your head in.
Take a big breath in here.
And then exhale.
Good.
Bringing that energy up,
touching your fingertips
from the right hand to the
heart and to the forehead.
And now we'll sit
up into Malasana.
So elbows to the
insides of the knees.
And then breathe-- breathe
down into your belly.
You ever see a frog
breathe into their throat?
That's how I want you to
breath into your belly.
Let it balloon out.
And then imagine a column of
all violet white light coming in
through the crown of the head
as you inhale into your belly.
And then as you exhale, envision
red color coming down and out
through the base
of the tailbone.
We're going to influence
with that kind of breath
Prana coming in through the
crown, down to the belly,
and then Apana-Vayu,
grounding energy.
So walk over to your window
and look outside into nature
or spend some time
appreciating a beautiful plant
inside your home.
One of Ayurveda's
chief understandings
is to be in tune with
the rhythms of nature--
the Mother Earth
that we live upon
and the vehicles to
our soul, the body,
are to be tuned
together in harmony.
In this way, we can better
maintain our health and balance
energy in order to
live fruitful lives.
Empower yourself
with the knowledge
to harmonize your health
and enjoy your life.
Enjoy.
Thank you for joining me.
Namaste.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of this series by watching
our docu series, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.